# Graph-Analysis 
Programs related to the field of **Graph Analysis** are expessed here. More on Graph Analysis is at the following link:
https://www.pinterest.com/HamedShahHosseini/graph-analysis/
## History:
**Graph theory** is said to be originated by the work of **Leonard Euler** when dealing by the **Konigsberg bridges problem**. He abstracted the lands (four) by nodes and the bridges (seven) by edges. 
 - However, Islamic Scholars (9th–14th centuries) used tree diagrams for lineage and knowledge organization.

The **Konigsberg bridges problem** asks to start at any land areas of the city, walk over each of the seven bridges exactly once, and return to the starting point. Euler proved that there is no solution for this problem.  
## Topics:
1) **What is a graph?** A graph is a mathematical structure to represent *relationships* between *objects*. Objects are **nodes** (vertices), and relationships are **edges** (links). 
Here, we review the graph definition, and discuss **undirected** graphs versus **directed** graphs with examples in Python.
2) **Graph: Adjacency matrix** For a graph with *n* nodes, the **adjacency matrix** is of size *n*-by-*n*. For **simple graphs**, the entries of the adjacency matrix is composed of zeros and ones. For undirected graphs, this matrix is *symmetric*.
Here, we give the Python code for defining the adjacency matrix for different types of graphs.
3) **Graph: Node degree** The **degree** of a node in graph is a simple concept which is quite useful in analyzing and understanding the graph. The degree of a node is the number of edges connected to the node. The definition of node degree for directed graphs includes in-degrees and out-degrees. 
We have some interesting formulae regarding the node degrees. For example, the **degree sum formula** (handshaking lemma) states that the sum of degrees of nodes in a graph is twice the number of the edges of the graph. 
Here, we review the concept of degrees in graphs by examples in Python.
4) **Adjacency list:** The adjacency list is another way to represent graphs. It is a data structure holding a list of nodes of a graph such that each node in the list stores its neighbors. Adjacency lists are particularly efficient for **sparse graphs** such as social networks, web graphs, and biological networks.
Here, we implement a Python class for a graph which holds the adjacency list of the graph in a *defaultdict*. We build two graphs by our class and show their adjacency lists. As a bonus, a Python function has also been defined to convert our graph to that of *NetworkX*. 
5) **Walk, trail, path, cycle (circuit), and Eulerian trail/circuit:** The concepts that define the sequences of nodes and edges within a graph are reviewed here. The conditions for a graph to have an Eulerian trail or circuit (cycle) are also mentioned.
The **Python** code of this NoteBook contains a small **graph analyzer** implemented from scratch for walks, trails, paths, cycles, and Eulerian trail or circuit.
6) **Subgraph:** A **subgraph** is a graph formed from a subset of the nodes and edges of a larger graph. A subgraph preserves the connections from the original graph, but may contain fewer nodes and edges. 
Here, we review the concept of subgraph and some of its types. Also, we provide a *Python* function from scratch to check if a graph is a subgraph of another graph. We also use some functions available by *NetworkX* too, for subgraphs. 
7) **Clique:** A **clique** is subset of nodes in a graph, which for its every two distinct nodes, there is an edge in the graph. In other words, a clique forms a **complete** subgraph.
In this Notebook, we review and implement the **Bron-Kerbosch** algorithm from scratch to find all maximal cliques in a given undirected graph. Moreover, we use the function **find_cliques** in *NetworkX* to compare with our results.
8) **Trees:** A **tree** is an **undirected** graph which is **connected** and **acyclic**. Or you may say a tree is an undirected connected graph with n nodes which has n-1 edges. 
Here, we review trees in graph theory and express different kinds of them. Then, we bring some Python code to build trees and do some operations on them. As a bonus, we also create a simple decision tree for medical diagnosis.
9) **Depth-first search:** A **depth-first search** (**DFS**) is a search algorithm that is used to traverse graphs or trees. A DFS can be implemented in **recursive** way or **iterative** way. 
Here, we implement both the *recursive* and *iterative* versions, and test them by a given graph. We also implement a DFS that finds a path between two nodes, and extend it to find all paths between two nodes.
10) **Topological sorting (ordering)** When we have a **DAG** (directed acyclic graph), we can form a **linear order** of nodes such that for every directed edge (u → v), node u comes before node v in the ordering. A DAG is a **directed** graph that has **no cycles**. Topological ordering is only possible for DAGs.
Here, we give two methods to create such orderings for DAGs: a **depth-first search** (DFS) method, and **Kahn's algorithm**. We bring both methods in Python codes. One feature of Kahn's algorthm is that it can report cycles in the given directed graph if such cycles exist.
As a bonus, we have also expressed a DFS-based method for checking if a directed graph is a DAG or not.
11) **Breadth-first search:** Breadth-first search (BFS) is another **uninformed** search algorithm, which is used for traversing graphs (or trees). BFS explores all nodes at the current depth level before moving on to nodes at the next depth level. It employs a **queue** to keep the order of exploration.
Here, we implement a BFS in Python code and use it for exploring nodes of a graph. We also implement the BFS for finding the **shortest path** from a start node to an end node. As a bonus, we use a BFS to compute the **degrees-of-separation** between two persons on a small *social network*.
12) **Dijkstra's algorithm:** This algorithm finds the shortest paths from a single **source** node to all other nodes in a **weighted** graph with **non-negative** edge weights. It uses a **greedy** approach, repeatedly visiting the closest unvisited node and updating distances to its neighbors. The algorithm guarantees **optimal** shortest paths and completes in O((|V|+|E|) log|V|) time with a **priority queue** (for  graph G=(V,E)).
Here, we implement Dijkstra's algorithm from scratch in Python with the use of a priority queue. The priority queue is created by a min-heap. A simple graph is given to the algorithm to test it. Also, as a bonus, we use the Dijkstra's algorithm to find the strongest friendship path between two users in a social network.
13) **A\* algorithm:** A\* algorithm is another **informed** search algorithm that finds the shortest path from a `start` node to a `goal` node. It may be viewed as an extention to **Dijkstra's** algorithm. A\* algorithm uses the **evaluation** function `f(n)=g(n)+h(n)`, where `g(n)` is the actual distance from the start node to current node `n`, and `h(n)` is the **heuristic** which estimates the distance from the current node `n` to the `goal` node. If the heuristic function `h(.)` never overestimates the actual distance to goal, then the A\* algorithm will find the **optimal** path. Such a heuristic is called **admissible**.
Here, we implement A\* algorithm from scratch in Python, and test it with a simple grid world.
14) **Greedy best-first search:** The **GBFS** is another **informed** search algorithm that relies solely on a **heuristic** function, say `h(.)`, to explore nodes. Thus, the **evaluation** function will be `f(n)=h(n)`.
The GBFS is a fast algorithm that may not find the optimal path. The GBFS is implemented here from scratch in **Python**, and then is tested by a grid graph having some obstacles. 
15) **Prim's algorithm for MST**: Prim's algorithm is used to find a **minimum spanning tree** (**MST**) of a weighted undirected graph. A graph may have more than one MST. Prim's algorithm is a node-based MST algorithm. It means that Prim's algorithm starts from a random node and grows it as a tree by always adding cheapest edge that connects a node inside the tree to a node outside the tree.
Here, we implement Prim's algorithm from scratch in Python using a binary min-heap as a priority queue. We then apply the algorithm to a simple graph. The original graph and its MST are shown by **NetworkX**.
16) **Kruskal's algorithm for MST:** Kruskal's algorithm is an edge-based algorithm for obtaining the **minimum spanning tree** (**MST**) of a weighted undirected graph. In this algorithm, we first sort edges based on their weight. Then, we add edges one by one until we get `n-1` edges for a graph with `n` nodes such that none of the edges creates cycle.
Here, we give the Python code of Kruskal's algorithm from scratch using **union-find** data structure. Then, we use two example graphs to test the algorithm.